TEAM AGREEMENT GUIDELINES

For

Teamy McTeam Team

Version 1




Prepared by:

Eloise Newman n9483217
Genevieve Richards n9665544
Teagan Cliff n9829628
Chad Gay n9410392
Kiranpreet Kaur n9591010


Prepared for:

Jesse St. Germain






28th July 2017


Sign-off and Approvals

Team Agreement Sign-Off:  
The undersigned members of this team agree to abide by this team agreement to ensure the successful completion of the Smart City project to meet the client’s requirements and timeframes.
Person’s name & student number
Signature
Date
Eloise Newman n9483217


29/07/17
Genevieve Richards n9665544


31/07/17
Teagan Cliff n9829628


31/07/17
Chad Gay n9410392


31/07/17
Kiranpreet Kaur n9591010





Tutor Approval






Table of Contents




Sign-off and Approvals	ii
1	Introduction	1
2	Team Agreement	1
2.1	Team Principles and Processes	1
2.2	Non-Compliance	1
2.3	Dispute Resolution & Conflict Management	1
3.	Conclusion	1	1
Appendix – Team Agreement Guidelines	1
Possible Topics for Agreement Principles	1
Communication and Operational Process Topics	1
Defining Major and Minor Non-Compliance	1
Penalties for Major and Minor Non-Compliance	1




Introduction

The purpose of this document is to discuss and agree on the operating norms (principles and communication processes) for Teamy McTeam Team who are a team of students in IFB299 Application Design and Development.  

The aim of the team agreement is to describe the principles underpinning effective teamwork and how they will be applied by this team during the Smart City project.  In this way the agreement provides a communication tool and contract between team members and their tutor regarding their obligations, responsibilities and activities to ensure successful processes, product, and outcome.  

This document includes:
High level principles contributing to an effective team;
Agreed communication and operational processes to action the principles.
Definitions of minor and major non-compliance and examples of instances that may constitute a breach of the agreement’s conditions.
Dispute resolution and conflict management processes.

Team Agreement 

All team members must have participated in the formulation of this Team Agreement and are committed to abide by it.
Team Principles and Processes

The team has agreed on three key principles of behaviour, in order to guarantee an effective team environment. The first is to be respectful of one another in all contexts, guaranteeing positive relationships and helping to avoid conflict. Secondly, the team has determined that it is vital that members are willing to compromise on ideas proposed throughout the project development process, for the purposes of fostering a productive and efficient environment that considers all possible angles of a problem. Finally, team members are to adhere to their agreed team roles in order to positively benefit this productivity and avoid compromising the aforementioned principle of respect. However, in the event that a particular team member’s expertise or specific input is required in a role outside of those assigned to them, and with appropriate notice and approval from the other team members, exceptions to this principle are permitted – provided that such exceptions will not adversely affect any other principles outlined in this document. 
In regards to principles of communication, team members are expected to advise of any issues within the group as soon as they occur, in order to guarantee their nullification and avoid conflict between team members or possible inefficiencies in the project’s development. Additionally, members are expected to attend all scheduled meetings, both virtual and physical, and actively participate as appropriate according to their assigned roles. This principle may be temporarily disregarded provided that the offending team member has provided ample notice (at least 48 hours), and the entire team agrees that their reasoning for their absence is valid and reasonable. This is in order to ensure that team members are appropriately engaging with the group and that no team member falls behind on the project. To further guarantee this, team members are expected to ‘check-in’ with their process and progress of work at least three times per week, with two of those communications occurring through the meetings. Additionally, to ensure the steady progress of work, team members will acknowledge any messages from other members within 24 hours of their being sent, and will appropriately respond or answer the message within 48 hours.
Finally, the key principles of operational processes are as follows: firstly, team members are expected to meet all deadlines set by the team, by dedicating appropriate time to each task. Should a team member feel they will not meet their deadline, 48 hours of advance warning should be provided, excepting emergencies. 
Secondly, team member meetings will be held twice weekly at an agreed time, through an agreed means. Such means could be one of the following: physically, a Discord voice call, a Skype video call, a Facebook forum, or other virtual conference. The currently determined times are 7:45pm Monday evenings, and 7:00pm Friday evenings – both on Discord voice calls. Team members are also to attend the weekly subject workshops. Should any of the above meetings times or details need to be changed, advance warning of 48 hours is required, and be agreed upon by the entirety of the group.    

For the purposes of the team, the following outlines the allotment of roles:
Name:
Team role:
Meeting role:
Genevieve Richards
SCRUM Master
Convenor/Leader
Chad Gay
Development Team
Technology Decisions
Teagan Cliff
Development Team
Timekeeper, Participant
Kiranpreet Kaur
Development Team
Timekeeper, Participant
Eloise Newman
Project Owner/Client
Reader/Scribe

Non-Compliance

Minor non-compliance definition
Example
Not responding to a message or communication within the appropriate time-frame.
A team member does not respond to an email within 48 hours, resulting in a minor set-back of the project as a particular feature’s development cannot be continued temporarily.
No warning is provided that a team member will be late to or unable to attend an agreed meeting.
The Project Owner doesn’t attend a meeting, and the developers continue to spend time on a  feature which is no longer required.
Causing unnecessary problems with other team members. 
A developer is refusing to follow the SCRUM Master’s instructions because they were rude and disrespectful, halting a portion of the project’s development. 

Major non-compliance definition
Example
A team member does not complete their work to an appropriate standard.
A function is of less-than-adequate standard, reducing professionalism of the project and undermining the legitimacy of other team member’s work.
A team member does not complete their assigned work within their time frame.
A developer never completes a particular function, substantially setting back the project’s timeline and creating several substantial issues that negatively impact other developers’ work. 
A team member takes action without appropriately consulting the team.
A developer adds large sections of new material to the project without first consulting the SCRUM Master and the team, causing other team members to lose work or encounter substantial errors, and wasting large amounts of time. 
A team member does not attend a subject workshop without prior notice. 
The Project Owner does not attend a workshop, resulting in their missing vital information in regards to the project.


Dispute Resolution & Conflict Management

In the event of a minor breach of the Agreement, the offending team member is given a warning, and is required to immediately rectify their non-compliance (such as respond to the communication, resolve the issue, or catch up on what work was missed). Should a team member receive three warnings, further action will be taken with the team’s workshop tutor, which may result in removal from the group or academic penalty. 
If the non-compliance is due to a personal problem, either individually or with another team member, then the offender is required to have a period of open communication with either the Project Owner or the SCRUM Master about what is causing the issue, with the intentions of resolving it or coming to a conclusion that is beneficial for the team. 

If a team member commits a major breach of the Agreement, then a reprimand of suitable weight is to be issued by the SCRUM Master or Project Owner, upon approval by the other team members.  Additionally, consultation with the team’s workshop tutor will be undertaken to discuss possible avenues of opportunity through which the team can recover, and the possibility of a need for further punishment of the offender if deemed needed by the other team members. The team member will be expected to rectify their non-compliance as soon as possible in order to avoid further possible negative impacts, or negotiate assistance from other team members if they are unable to rectify the situation themselves. Continued issues stemming from the major non-compliance may result in removal from the team and/or academic penalty. 

3.	Conclusion

This document has articulated the high level and operational processes agreed to by Teamy McTeam Team.  This team agreement will apply for the duration of the Smart City project. To meet the objectives of the project and demonstrate their abilities as IT professionals, team Teamy McTeam Team will implement the principles, processes and management activities described.

Appendix – Team Agreement Guidelines 

In order for your team to achieve its common goals, to coordinate activities and to enable group synergy, your team and its members must communicate regularly and abide by mutually acceptable and beneficial principles of behaviour.  

In the ITB002 students form their own teams.  Team members can then negotiate team principles and operational process and record these conditions in their Team Agreement.  In developing the Team Agreement team members must also agree what constitutes a major breach of (non-compliance with) of agreed behaviours, the penalties for such breaches.  

The notions of team agreements and team meetings were introduced in the week 1 lecture and you have been completing some online teamwork learning activities as part of your team process management.  

Some possible topics for consideration in the Team Agreement are listed below.  Your team should develop principles and operational processes and any other relevant items you think are necessary to establish the “rules” by which your team will operate.  A template is available to help you identify content items and structure your agreement.

Possible Topics for Agreement Principles  
The guiding principles you develop might address the following issues:
Your team goals (How you will define success.   What level of achievement / grade does your team want for this project);
How your team will reach consensus when decision-making;
How the team will manage & resolve differences of opinion.  (Will the team require all individuals to accept the team's view?);
How you will get quiet team members or students who have English as a second language to actively contribute to team discussions;
How team members will share knowledge and actively collaborate with other team members to ensure collaboration;
How tasks will be allocated and how work will be completed (will you work according to the project plan, or use an event-driven informal process?);
How your team will resolve or accept personal or professional differences;
The process or channel will you use to escalate issues that the team cannot resolve;
Will your team have a team leader role? And if so what are their responsibilities and how will they be supported, rewarded or compensated for their additional work load.
Equitable workload for team work.
Will the team accept freeloaders (people who do no work on the project), how will you identify them, and what are you going to do about them?
Ensure that work is done to an acceptable level of quality and meets the project’s requirements;
What process will you follow to deal with poor quality or late work;
What you will do if members make significantly different contributions in terms of quantity or quality of work;
etc

Communication and Operational Process Topics
Your team communication and operational processes should explain in detail how the principles you have stated are put into operation.  They might include statements that include:
How often your team meetings will be held, where, what time & for how long;
What regular agenda categories will be discussed at each meeting (eg progress made, issues);
Who will record the team meetings (eg meeting date, attendees, issues discussed, decisions, actions) and enter the data in TeamWorker when necessary;
Will the team use an issues register to track the resolution of project, team and technical issues; if so how will this work.
How often team members will communicate with each other;
How team members will communicate between meetings;
How often team members will check their email or voice mail;
The timeframes team members will accept as reasonable to respond to email or voice mail messages;
How team members will update each other with progress made, especially if they cannot attend a meeting; 
What a team member should do if he/she cannot meet his/her assigned tasks and deadlines;
How the project plan will be updated to reflect actions completed and new actions assigned and who is responsible for these updates; 
Will a project library be established to contain electronic and/or print versions of documents and emails and who is responsible for maintaining this resource;
etc












Defining Major and Minor Non-Compliance

This section should assist you manage team and individual behaviours.  Your team should agree how this section should be completed and what items it may include.  It is up to you!  

You might start by defining and providing examples of what the team considers to be major or minor non-compliance, i.e. a breach of one of Agreement principles or communication processes (e.g. being more than 5 working days overdue with agreed deadlines, freeloading, not responding to emails etc). 

Penalties for Major and Minor Non-Compliance

This is up to your team to agree and propose penalties.  The team must then take responsibility for applying the agreed penalties.  You may agree to deal with major breaches by reallocating an agreed percentage of marks, or even expulsion from the group. 

You may agree to allow a small number of minor transgressions occur without penalty as long as team members behave appropriately & professionally.





